at Hays State Prison in Northwest
Georgia inmates have earned some of the
tightest control in the state law a man
paramilitary discipline
rigid structure but the balance of power
is about to change
if 1,700 inmates and I don't want to be
here no more and start walking towards
the fans what are they going to do about
it it's a threat that could shut the
prison down we need to get this back to
normal do you understand
behind bars there are two sets of rules
to prison protocol and the convict code
to survive one code you may have to
break the other over a three-year span
National Geographic followed the lives
of inmates and officers in the state of
Georgia when a paramilitary system is up
against convicted felons I invest
everybody update on us this man who's
really in charge join the real baseball
this is the world of hard time
[Music]
Ricca gals quickly we got into their
hiding contraband we're going to do a
good thorough shakedown with scripts
Urschel bring them out put them in the
TV room shake light fixers check socket
take the onions Pickers all right
don't spend a whole lot of time and lock
a bus because we know Amy's not gonna
have a whole lot of contraband and lock
about anybody injured everybody feeling
pretty good all right let's do it
squad up t touch right come right one
hello hello for the last two months the
state of Georgia has been on the trail
of some startling Intel
[Music]
inmates are planning something big
a mass action set to kick off at Hays
State Prison in less than 48 hours so
today officers are stepping in to
reassert control
what do you legally
starting with a shakedown a thorough
search of an entire cellblock
and in minutes
contraband begins to emerge tobacco is
banned in Georgia's prisons making it a
valuable commodity on the inmate black
market just 1/3 is to expect free next
homemade alcohol made from fermented
fruit known to the inmates as buck our
parish and better and then makeshift
knives these are homemade shanks as the
column in prison something do you
protect yourself with raw somebody else
with I guess you can see while these are
contraband
[Music]
but despite the dangers that drugs and
weapons can pose officers haven't found
the main target of the search until now
Binh LOC K get into it
cellphones are the most potent threat to
security and prisons nationwide and then
this shakedown alone officers have
uncovered six it's a fine that's put
internal investigator Sharon Kelso on
high alert
there are several concerns with cell
phone first of all how did it get into
the institution that is Felton security
problem but once it's inside the
institutions they could arrange an
escape or have more drugs or phones
brought into the institution or they can
stay in contact with each other which is
a big problem because they do it from
institution institution all efficiency
cell phones give inmates a direct line
to the free world and each other
align the system can't supervise and
when inmates communicate they can
coordinate unify it's a threat at any
prison but one that's all the more
dangerous at a place like Hays a state
prison is home to 1600 inmates
nearly half of them closed security
among the hardest to handle
it had that evil spirit on the premises
of the whole ground got walls out up
they hungry you know it's a food chain
somebody has to get aid pays is a tough
place to do time and it's only getting
worse
Georgia is streamlining its prison
system shutting old facilities down and
transferring some of its worst offenders
here in two years the percentage of
closed security inmates at Hays has
grown
you got positive inmates it's just the
negative outweighs the positives you
know you got something mace that you let
me just don't give it not me period
because of the time they get
[Music]
I see I'm not I take everything I want
and if you got some I want overcome get
we got a predator I think I booty
Bandhan
you got me there to watch out like me we
have approximately 300 ma to have a life
sentence at about a hundred inmates that
have a life without parole countless
numbers of inmates its life plus 20
years life plus 105 plus 300 I try to
treat everyone the same but if the
warden knows his name
it's not you or a man morning inspection
is a daily routine for warden clay Tatum
ensuring that bunks and uniforms aren't
ordered judoka more delicately
but amid rumors that inmates are
planning to push back he's also getting
a feel for the mood on the tiers I speak
to every inmate to find out their
attitude no matter who it is I would
speak to him some of them just totally
refused Authority but it doesn't happen
as much as you think they know what's
going to be required and they normally
go with it
yeah you know topper bond when I first
got here Prison was chill man laid-back
I mean everything here worked real well
what used to be this well-oiled machine
that air just flowed this turned into
all kind of it overall it looks good I
appreciate y'all what you got
the changes that haze have hit every
inmate but convicts like Yankee may feel
it the most after five years here he's
carved out his place with a solid
reputation and a successful tattoo
hustle when I run a tune in here is a
negative thing I guess but I've got this
net cord or whatever I might as well
pursue it you know what I'm saying
just like on-the-job-training man you
know I mean I got unlimited skin in here
by the time I get out I'm gonna have it
down
but getting out might be wishful
thinking for an inmate with a sentence
like yankees in the free world yankee is
chris timmreck a soldier fresh off a
tour in Iraq and in 2004 he gets into an
altercation with a friend that turns
deadly on timmreck stabs the other man
over a dozen times he is found guilty of
murder and sentenced to life
[Music]
it's time that is made Yankee a veteran
at Hays and an expert at testing the
system's limits that's it it's like a
big game man administration is here to
set order and establish rules but it's
ultimately up to the inmates whether or
not they want to abide by them you don't
say they say no they're saying no for
instance when I first came in the system
whatever you doing whatever you do it
like run attacked or something right
well back then you know you have to hire
you and look out man let me let you know
that okay the pilots in here come around
whatever and then loop there it would be
the police towed yeah so we're going to
go ahead and stop momentarily after a
while you know officers got hip today
they've come in a watch board now an
officer hits the floor and the whole
film coach starts hollering
[Music]
at every turn inmates will push back
against the prison's Authority ranging
from petty rule-breaking to more serious
threats this strap here and this strap
here you would think it might could not
get off that nut-and-bolt oh but they
some I figured out a way to take this
nut off and they were shuffling up and
use them for handmade weapons
these fans ran the system establishes
control the inmates tested but the
stakes are about to change in the past
few weeks officers here have been
sensing tension on the tiers the growing
frustration
and as a chance inmates are using cell
phones to get behind a common cause
pushing back against the system at Hayes
where inmates outnumber officers five to
one that's a serious threat
if 1,700 inmates and I don't want to be
here no more and start walking towards
the fans that you think 4050 pollies is
gonna be able to do so what are they
going to do about it
blacks whites Mexicans all together you
know I'm saying Bloods and Crips and
gangs disciples ball guys that's all one
what just happened what do we do now
and hit the hem right they're scared of
that
[Applause]
they got good system I no doubt about
that they got the gate lock you ain't
got no key it's totally disadvantaged uh
but it fit them perfectly because it's
even control people when they are
families no human being could go to a
horse of I'm in such a did but I losing
some of his diamond he got to
[Music]
at Hays State Prison and Tryon Georgia
inmates are planning a massive protest
it's just the latest challenge at a
place that's been pushed to the limits
before
that's your partner bleeding back
it is October 13 2008 and an emergency
count has just confirmed every prisons
worst fear militant vehicle was passing
by so to black is full of blood and the
other face to why boys are gone two
inmates with violent pasts have just
escaped what took them minutes to
accomplish will change Hayes forever
looks like it out right here a lot of
sides in the coming hours and days
hundreds of prison and law enforcement
officials scour the area but the effort
goes within the walls of the prison as
well as officers searched for
intelligence and reassert control go let
go a shift is underway that will change
Hayes forever
and Rick Jacobs director of special
operations knows that to maintain order
the prison must tighten its grip
ultimately inmates must recognize that
correctional staff run the facility and
it's when inmates fail to recognize that
that they're willing to take more risk
so it's extremely important that you
create a constant visual and physical
reinforcer to all the inmate population
that policies and procedures are being
reinforced days not every shift every
day went by and every day they're out
there searching for them and I could
never find them so that was sweet right
and was totally cool whatever man we're
dealing with all the repercussions and
lockdown and whatever else because of
this you know what I'm saying but man
these two dudes they got their life back
what I'm saying or so we thought
community is breathing a sigh of relief
tonight as an escaped prisoner is back
behind bars he was captured early
Saturday morning more than 150 miles
away from the Hays State Prison and
Tryon that he escaped from a month ago
[Music]
Wow how you do it more than a month
after his escape one fugitive is
wrestled to the ground by police
officers in Livonia Georgia four months
later the other is captured by the
department's fugitive squad in a suburb
of Atlanta and while both are now locked
away in Georgia's highest security
prison
their actions have left an indelible
mark on Hayes
[Music]
[Applause]
today any mass movement is a closely
monitored event
[Applause]
[Music]
Pat searches hinder the flow of
contraband
[Music]
and where there was once an open yard at
the center of the compound the prison
has installed a 14-foot fence
[Applause]
it's the backbone of a new management
philosophy at Hays controlled movement
and inmates are feeling the strain
[Music]
control movement goes like this you know
ok it's going to be child call so this
building over here is going to tell our
we're on standby now
[Music]
well 15 minutes later when they call a
how we're all going to walk to the
corner as one big group you know then we
walk to the corner and we stand there
for like another five minutes then we
walk up to the center walk and we stay
in there for another five minutes you
know what I'm saying and then before we
go into South we stand there like
another five minutes and then we can go
in a child and it's the same exact
routine on the way back we have to go
through it and every single day every
single meal three times days same over
and over and over and over and over
again and we got road rage in here too
I'm sorry
[Music]
the changes to the prison have improved
security at Hays but that may come with
a price greater tension among inmates
[Music]
attention that has already found its way
to the surface
[Music]
less than one year after the escaped
inmates in D building to the violent
stand they forced the shift officer to
abandon his post as he attempted to lock
them down for a routine count inmates
barricaded themselves in and vandalized
the building
but after two hours the prison special
response team stormed in and took back
the dorm the balance of power shifted
that day if only for a short time and
now the inmates at Hays are planning
another face-off another test of the
prison's ability to keep control County
I'm in a man they said hey Nick you're
not doing some time go to the fire
department this fire station is one of
the busiest in Georgia's Department of
Corrections and it's manned by the
inmates of Hays State Prison it's just
one of the state's prison work programs
designed to provide job training and a
lifeline to the outside world
even for inmates like David crow who
will never see that world again I work
four days a week on my detail at octaves
if I can work seven I would there's an
awful lot of percentage of the
population here that does want to to do
something positive and to get something
other out of this out of this time and
out of this experience that will benefit
themselves with blower on David crow has
a unique perspective on doing time the
result of nearly twenty years spent on
death row in 1989 crow is convicted of a
grisly murder and is sentenced to die in
but two hours before his execution his
sentence is commuted to life without a
chance of parole and he is sent to live
out that life at Hays when I first got
here I almost felt as if they had just
turned me loose even though it's in here
even though it's in phase even though
it's miserable surroundings it's still
life there's no different from me in
here than it is you on the outside our
life is what would make of it right now
I'm just choosing to make each day the
best that I can work details like this
are privileged in Georgia crow who makes
glasses for inmates across the state and
the prison optics shop has earned a spot
here through good behavior he's one of
the inmates who's chosen to do smooth
time a relative minority here at Hays
and now a rumor is circulating that
could threaten that way of life
the prison has uncovered evidence that a
group of inmates are using smuggled and
cellphones to organize a mass action out
on the tiers the anticipation seems to
be growing word is that the action is
intended to be peaceful a sit-in of
sorts and inmates demands are broad they
want paperwork legalized cigarettes and
a more lenient parole system but it's
unclear whether a group as divided as
convicts can get behind a common cause
I'm going home you know if I had a life
sentence I probably would would do some
drastic as hell I mean wait low telling
some of these guys been down on the
charges for so long ain't really got
nothin to lose so far on cigarettes you
got some folks going did some for long
day whatever you feel like that means
that you believing that should be
telling you we've heard all types of
stuff too you know just like you have
you know basically they're supposed to
be on Thursday inmate guests understand
off or you know don't go to your details
you know say I mean if you don't go to
your detail who got to do it they got to
do it
inmates uniting against the
administration a concern for any prison
and it's all supposed to begin tomorrow
December 9th but preparations are
already underway
warden Tatum and his team have a special
briefing with field ops manager Rick
Jacobs the biggest thing that we've seen
is actually a cell phone that we
confiscated yesterday the cell phone as
we confiscate it and had it in our hand
there was a text message come across
what Nana Macy said was that the inmates
are gonna go in their cell at lockdown
tonight and not come out I think one of
the most difficult inmates sometimes to
manage is not the guy that's running at
you with something in his hand and we
all know what to do with that it's the
one that is trying to manipulate the
system but that's neither here nor there
for us our job is to protect the public
and maintain this prison over here and
operate with good security notice right
here this this thing is not being taken
lightly it's not we know at 5:00 a.m.
lights on and may start getting up going
about will start knowing what's
happening by the time we get the shift
change we're full well know what we're
dealing with okay that's on oh thank you
[Music]
lockdown
with the start of the protest just hours
away a nightly ritual begins locking
inmates down for count and neither side
is tipping their hand
for inmates the plan is simple tomorrow
they were refused to leave their selves
for the prison the concern is the
unknown whether the protest will be
peaceful
we're chance for some to lash out
against the system they thought we've
seen back trying to see is it gonna
happen
they trying to make the city like she'll
be lock them down
should we jail later just don't like
about it see what happened on the wintry
thing finally while we lay down because
it's a coming right because I got a
little hill until they opening gates
the stage is now set and as officers
lockdown cell houses for the night the
prison isn't taking any chances out
front the cert team has been put on high
alert a waiting word that the count is
cleared are they
[Music]
8 to 12 even anymore that's it warning
in video out so 50 War II to expand to a
movie were out soldiers they lock him
down
tonight's lockdown goes off without a
hitch but the true test will come in the
early hours of the morning when the
protest is supposed to begin at Hays
State Prison and try on Georgia okay
sergeant Brandon Henderson is heading
out to escort inmates to their work
details it's a daily routine but this
isn't every other day inmates have
promised a boycott of the prison system
and no one knows whether they will go
through with it until now the fate of
the protests rests with the first shift
kitchen duty workers if they don't go to
their job the sit-in is on lieutenant
offenders we 109 rdn everybody asked all
the GP dorms and nobody reported the
work we had woman who said he would be
willing to go okay but one out of nine
yeah Wayne will see me my own when I
explained that I'm not going to put him
out there all right so that's
jeopardizing right so that's Lea right
there only one inmate was willing to
work but for his safety the prison won't
allow him the protest is officially
underway
not a word do not want it to indeed
change that we willing to just ride that
everybody who will just ride it out we
got never lose but we got lose
the administration jumps into action
because inmates are refusing to come out
of their selves the prison must come to
them delivering the morning meal hey you
want to eat turn aside all thankful crap
off this window when I came this first
encounter could be an opportunity for
inmates to lash out at officers Rafi's
windows all the windows stay facing a
window do not date but so far all is
quiet the prison's response is going as
planned
elsewhere on the compound however some
inmates are flooding their cells and
throwing trash under their doors a sign
that not everyone in tends to sit
silently we must all we want a healthy
babies imagine this is the movie wanna
give face or good evil plan again priest
is no we diary
we lay down man don't let her die
low-tech we do it
inmates might be pushing back but as the
morning progresses the prison makes its
move to take back the reins
we'll go keep them legs at least on
24-hour lockdown possibly even longer
they asked for this they're the ones
that refused to come out refused to work
we're basically turn it around and put
it in our terms and deciding when
they'll get out but started as a sit-in
will now be a lockdown
if the prison's most valuable tool of
control
a means of maintaining the peace and
disrupting inmate unity something that
is central to the prison's effort
invited the latest Intel the protest has
spread far beyond haze thousands of
Georgia prisoners went through today
with a plan to go on strike it we're
told three found two men from prisons
all over the state we're going to not
work and remain in their cells in
peaceful protests okay right hey Mark
what with the scene at Hayes playing out
in four prisons around the state the
system moves its efforts in a new
direction
cut off and make communication before it
spreads
a task left to the tax squad an elite
and highly trained team of officers
[Music]
their mission root out the contraband
phones that are fueling to protest
cellphone battery had two equivalent dog
spot-check cells for drugs
and any resistance is handled swiftly
take your little Wally to pain up lay
down on your bed nobody keep your hand
on your head
both of you get him up get him out take
him up and get him all the sleep you
lost me a minute satellite but it's not
just inmate cells that can serve as
hiding places for contraband
[Music]
and the prison is bringing another tool
into play in their search
it's called the boss chair
and mates remove belt buckles and
watches before taking a seat where their
bodies are scanned for weapons or
cellphones leaving big the image film
down expensive only it has these
different positions are spotted mayy to
be in the anal cavity on foot in the
hand and his mouth just to detect
contraband humanely how hidden some
worldly body that we can't find us
observatory left in the coming days the
boss chair will play a part in
uncovering 29 cellphones at Hayes and as
quickly as the search begins in this
dorm it gets results
you know we found two cell phones in
this dorm already that's just on the
bottom range so far the tac squad
presence is part of a two-prong strategy
to take control with the sit-in
the other half rests with investigators
like Sharon Kelso good morning can I get
you to come out and talk to me for a
moment let's suppose you know I'm Sharon
Kelso an investigator with internal
investigations actually I'm going to be
speaking to everyone in the building we
just have to be the lucky number one
kalsa was part of the team trying to
find out who organized the sit-in and
how the word spread their job is to
question each of Hayes's sixteen hundred
inmates one by one how it formed to
organize that most of them were saying
that you know I've heard about it but I
really don't have anything to do with it
this summer very other thing a very free
and tell you exactly what's going on
just short of telling you who actually
organized it so they'll give you bits
and pieces for you to stick together you
take the time to sit whatever you may
can take a very long time but I see this
is going to be another situation that
we're going to counteract and we prevail
over it because you don't put these on
corners okay the way say those things on
you
they gain absolutely nothing we never
offer or promise anything to them and we
tell them that I can't give you anything
other than a few moments of my time and
sometimes that is enough once I get down
down here I'll move up there all right
[Music]
I've been with the Department for 18
years to be a female can sometimes get
an inmate to talk to me when they
wouldn't normally talk to someone else
then I sometimes use that to my
advantage to get someone to talk to me
and they didn't even slip again to
loosen up and tell you some things that
they wouldn't normally tell others I've
been that one little moment with them
making them to light their their needs
are important because they don't always
get that so I give them a little bit of
that for a few minutes which helps them
to open up with me
as the system continues to manage the
protest the reality of the lockdown is
setting in for inmates across the camp
it's a reminder of who sets the tone of
life behind bars and for new inmates and
seasoned convicts alike that can be a
difficult reality to accept see if it's
tilting this design to to destroy and
break everything that come in contact
with it your job is not to be broke down
no you got to be mentally prepared for
all the changes all the sit back and
everything and if you're not meant to
repair for a year you're going to laugh
the system is on alert for any
eventuality possible slow fire is
possible flooding and at each camp the
administration acts first keeping the
institution's running and above all
keeping control
[Applause]
[Music]
for the past five days a state prison
has been on lockdown
the yard is empty the laundry Mattress
Factory and optics lab stands silent
it's the system's way of controlling an
inmate protest that has spread to four
of the state's 31 prisons but so far the
inmates have kept their word their
protest has been a peaceful one and
after nearly a week confined to their
cells they might be willing to stand
down so today it's time for the
administration to take the next step
[Music]
in case things get out of hand
officers are preparing a contingency
plan chemical munitions muzzle blast
goes into 37 millimeters for close range
dispersed CS gas into a crowd and then
door to flameless explosives for CS gas
inside a building team has to build this
mainly what would be using this money to
burst crowds if you got to the inside
just prepared for whatever make them up
what I'm going to do to save the
security Institute it's a transition
helm by the tactical squad the plan is
simple but crucial
our main concern disease choke hold our
ears officers will man what are called
choke points on the yard got one right
here in front of C building got one on
the center sidewall right across gate
that one of them all right here once
four pm count clears if every dorm will
go to child leaving their cells for the
first time in six days what I'm supposed
to respond we'll go and get the inmate
down to bring them out here on the wall
right
but it's a risky plan any mass movement
is an opportunity for inmates to lash
out against officers or each other
so coordination is essential to the day
is a big big day for hey state prison
I'm going to let you know that today is
transition day and I need you here
the staff at Hays State Prison needs
your help
so does that count clears they're going
to move you out and we're going to set
up in choke points out here to assist
the Hays State Prison line staff running
this evening chow everybody with me on
that
just a few minutes ago I heard handmade
yelling out of D building you're gonna
get killed you gonna get killed the
first sign of intelligence recognize
what you dealing with we can't afford to
overreact but we can't afford to under
react do you understand
we need to get this back to normal make
sure you know that going in this is
serious business but that's why we gotta
clean but we have to have a plan because
there's more of them than they are of us
and we need to stick to our plan
be intentional I'll be in touch thank
y'all thank you wow
officers take their posts at the
checkpoints and as the count clears each
one of Hayes's 1600 inmates is on the
move
one dorm at a time
one of the strongest lessons that you
learn when you've been incarcerated
creating a period of time is that most
of the things that happen are beyond
your control and you either learn to go
with it and deal with it in your own way
or it becomes a real headache for you
the show of force seems to have its
desired effect
Chow goes off without incident
the inmates stand down without
resistance and back in the dorms
the talk is not about what was but what
could have been the administration the
administration was they always wake up
we do never send out because the inmates
didn't sit down get anything done
aligned you really can't do it pieces
you know they don't work kind of but I
see the reason why don't they know that
work though is because society looks bad
and then there's a label that says okay
with it no prisoners just animals anyway
the Georgia chain gangsters that will
never be any unit in the world times we
can't be together and do that I don't
know exactly how this thing goes but
like crash you know I mean you ain't got
to put it on with no top I know above
the crab because they just keep pulling
each other back down you know I mean and
that's how it is in here they prefer
just be stupid little kids instead of
grown-ass men and come together one time
sit down one time the adults at one time
and make something happen
it takes just more than five prisons in
the state of Georgia for happen
[Music]
as the day winds down it's clear that
the strategy here at Hayes has paid off
but tomorrow brings with it the next
question will inmates continue to stand
off against the administration or will
the routine of prison life went out
[Music]
you actually buy a state prison this
might be the wife is further than the
world man we should want somebody try to
feel our pain you film and people in out
of world the free world they don't know
our struggles so of course they can't
feel our hustle you feel it's been three
days since the lockdown at Hays State
Prison lifted and life here is returning
to normal
investigations into the sit-in are
ongoing but already some facts are clear
ringleaders allegedly collaborated with
free world activists immobilized inmates
and four prisons across the state a
daring gesture that proved how powerful
and dangerous cell phones could be
inside prison ultimately no one knows if
their actions will have a lasting effect
y'all ready I'm ready look out and for
an inmate like Yankee who saw hope for
parole reform in the protest that's a
hard reality to face if I was given the
chance I'd have had a ticket and
everything I should have I got life in
prison unless I make something happen in
the courts or whatever else
man I'm stuck for me to sit here and
think about the fact that that I could
possibly never get out never go home to
me that just that's just not an option
for me man
anything I can do
nonviolent - you know maybe make my time
my life I guess better it's worth it
[Music]
for now it seems like the sit-in is
already a fading memory
the factories have reopened and the
laundry is running hopes for change have
given way to the familiar and for an
enemy like David crow that's a welcome
resolution for me to be able to stay
busy keeps me from realizing or thinking
about the fact that I'm in prison and
that I may never get out of prison and
in the post escape era here in Hays the
predictability factor has pretty much
gone out the window
I'm sure it can change again in the
future
unfortunately in an environment like
this you have to adapt and get used to
it because you can't walk away from it
[Music]
hating on key change our institution
change you just can't keep playing hard
rules and taking from the guy but I
don't expect me for something else to
happen no you can't do that some of the
later send a ham for sudden you flip
over this is reality for a bad life
[Music]
although new inmates and changing times
might test the system you will tell I
know all right I do it as far as the
prison is concerned that's just another
challenge to be contained and overcome
during the escape statewide it looks
like you know there was a problem with
the entire prison it was the system
worked looking at all the process
procedures what we could do to tighten
the pay's up and what has changed since
so a lot has changed it's just another
day at the prison called haze guard over
the years I've irrigated one of the
toughest places in the state for inmates
doing time
a reality driven home the moment new
arrivals pull in through the back gate
going one time like a line right here to
grab all right listen up very careful
every time somebody come off this bus
they coming off with a cellphone with a
lighter with cigarettes with marijuana
can't hide it in your baby powder can't
hide it in your pack out cuz we're gonna
find it you step out man
go stand over there do not speak unless
you're spoken to do not go nowhere
unless we tell you to do so you
understand that don't ask us where
you're going either we don't know where
you're going you find out when we take
you did y'all step forward to the gate I
don't know you two keep it down
yeah real right here man hey Georgia
Ruth hey great so we'll read it receipt
ha ha ha if they not same man still
holding yeah the head duck